
THE TRUMPET
RISE up, rise up,?And, as the trumpet blowing?Chases the dreams of men,?As the dawn glowing?The stars that left unlit?The land and water,?Rise up and scatter?The dew that covers?The print of last night's lovers--?Scatter it, scatter it!
While you are listening?To the clear horn,?Forget, men, everything?On this earth newborn,?Except that it is lovelier?Than any mysteries.?Open your eyes to the air?That has washed the eyes of the stars?Through all the dewy night:?Up with the light,?To the old wars;?Arise, arise!
THE SIGN-POST
THE dim sea glints chill. The white sun is shy.?And the skeleton weeds and the never-dry,?Rough, long grasses keep white with frost?At the hilltop by the finger-post;?The smoke of the traveller's-joy is puffed?Over hawthorn berry and hazel tuft.
I read the sign. Which way shall I go??A voice says: You would not have doubted so?At twenty. Another voice gentle with scorn?Says: At twenty you wished you had never been born.
One hazel lost a leaf of gold?From a tuft at the tip, when the first voice told?The other he wished to know what 'twould be?To be sixty by this same post. "You shall see,"?He laughed--and I had to join his laughter--?"You shall see; but either before or after,?Whatever happens, it must befall,?A mouthful of earth to remedy all?Regrets and wishes shall freely be given;?And if there be a flaw in that heaven?'Twill be freedom to wish, and your wish may be?To be here or anywhere talking to me,?No matter what the weather, on earth,?At any age between death and birth,--?To see what day or night can be,?The sun and the frost, the land and the sea,?Summer, Autumn, Winter, Spring,--?With a poor man of any sort, down to a king,?Standing upright out in the air?Wondering where he shall journey, O where?"
TEARS
IT seems I have no tears left. They should have fallen--?Their ghosts, if tears have ghosts, did fall--that day?When twenty hounds streamed by me, not yet combed
out?But still all equals in their rage of gladness?Upon the scent, made one, like a great dragon?In Blooming Meadow that bends towards the sun?And once bore hops: and on that other day?When I stepped out from the double-shadowed Tower?Into an April morning, stirring and sweet?And warm. Strange solitude was there and silence.?A mightier charm than any in the Tower?Possessed the courtyard. They were changing guard?Soldiers in line, young English countrymen,?Fair-haired and ruddy, in white tunics. Drums?And fifes were playing "The British Grenadiers".?The men, the music piercing that solitude?And silence, told me truths I had not dreamed?And have forgotten since their beauty passed.
TWO PEWITS
UNDER the after-sunset sky?Two pewits sport and cry,?More white than is the moon on high?Riding the dark surge silently;?More black than earth. Their cry?Is the one sound under the sky.?They alone move, now low, now high,?And merrily they cry?To the mischievous Spring sky,?Plunging earthward, tossing high,?Over the ghost who wonders why?So merrily they cry and fly,?Nor choose 'twixt earth and sky,?While the moon's quarter silently?Rides, and earth rests as silently.
THE MANOR FARM
THE rock-like mud unfroze a little and rills?Ran and sparkled down each side of the road?Under the catkins wagging in the hedge.?But earth would have her sleep out, spite of the sun;?Nor did I value that thin gilding beam?More than a pretty February thing?Till I came down to the old Manor Farm,?And church and yew-tree opposite, in age?Its equals and in size. The church and yew?And farmhouse slept in a Sunday silentness.?The air raised not a straw. The steep farm roof,?With tiles duskily glowing, entertained?The mid-day sun; and up and down the roof?White pigeons nestled. There was no sound but one.?Three cart-horses were looking over a gate?Drowsily through their forelocks, swishing their tails?Against a fly, a solitary fly.
The Winter's cheek flushed as if he had drained?Spring, Summer, and Autumn at a draught?And smiled quietly. But 'twas not Winter--?Rather a season of bliss unchangeable?Awakened from farm and church where it had lain?Safe under tile and thatch for ages since?This England, Old already, was called Merry.
THE OWL
DOWNHILL I came, hungry, and yet not starved;?Cold, yet had heat within me that was proof?Against the North wind; tired, yet so that rest?Had seemed the sweetest thing under a roof.
Then at the inn I had food, fire, and rest,?Knowing how hungry, cold, and tired was I.?All of the night was quite barred out except?An owl's cry, a most melancholy cry
Shaken out long and clear upon the hill,?No merry note, nor cause of merriment,?But one telling me plain what I escaped?And others could not, that night, as in I went.
And salted was my food, and my repose,?Salted and sobered, too, by the bird's voice?Speaking for all who lay under the stars,?Soldiers and poor, unable to rejoice.
SWEDES
THEY have taken the gable from the roof of clay?On the long swede pile. They have let in the sun?To the white and gold and purple of curled fronds?Unsunned. It is a sight more tender-gorgeous?At the wood-corner where Winter moans and drips?Than when, in the Valley of the Tombs of Kings,?A boy crawls down into a Pharaoh's tomb?And, first of Christian men, beholds the mummy,?God and monkey, chariot and throne and vase,?Blue pottery, alabaster, and gold.
But dreamless long-dead Amen-hotep lies.?This is a dream of Winter, sweet as Spring.
WILL YOU COME?
WILL you come??Will you come??Will you ride?So late?At my side??O, will you come?
Will you come??Will you come?If the night?Has a moon,?Full and bright??O, will you come?
Would you come??Would you come?If the noon?Gave light,?Not the moon??Beautiful, would you come?
Would you have come??Would you have come?Without scorning,?Had it been?Still morning??Beloved, would you have come?
If you come?Haste and come.?Owls have cried:?It grows dark?To ride.?Beloved, beautiful, come.
AS THE TEAM'S HEAD-BRASS
As the team's head-brass flashed out on the turn?The lovers disappeared into the wood.?I sat among the boughs of the fallen elm?That strewed an angle of the fallow, and?Watched the plough narrowing a yellow square?Of charlock. Every time the horses turned?Instead of treading me down, the ploughman leaned?Upon the handles to say or ask a word,?About the weather, next about the war.?Scraping the share he faced towards the wood,?And screwed along the furrow till the brass flashed?Once more.
The blizzard felled the elm whose crest?I sat in, by a woodpecker's round hole,?The ploughman said. "When will they take it away?"?"When the war's over." So the talk began--?One minute and an interval of ten,?A minute more and the same interval.?"Have you been out?" "No." "And don't want?to, perhaps?"?"If I could only come back again, I should.?I could spare an arm. I shouldn't want to lose?A leg. If I should lose my head, why, so,?I should want nothing more. . . . Have many gone?From here?" "Yes." "Many lost?" "Yes:
good few.?Only two teams work on the farm this year.?One of my mates is dead. The second day?In France they killed him. It was back in March,?The very night of the blizzard, too. Now if?He had stayed here we should have moved the tree."?"And I should not have sat here. Everything?Would have been different. For it would have been?Another world." "Ay, and a better, though?If we could see all all might seem good." Then?The lovers came out of the wood again:?The horses started and for the last time?I watched the clods crumble and topple over?After the ploughshare and the stumbling team.
THAW
OVER the land freckled with snow half-thawed?The speculating rooks at their nests cawed?And saw from elm-tops, delicate as flower of grass,?What we below could not see, Winter pass.
INTERVAL
GONE the wild day:?A wilder night?Coming makes way?For brief twilight.
Where the firm soaked road?Mounts and is lost?In the high beech-wood?It shines almost.
The beeches keep?A stormy rest,?Breathing deep?Of wind from the west.
The wood is black,?With a misty steam.?Above, the cloud pack?Breaks for one gleam.
But the woodman's cot?By the ivied trees?Awakens not?To light or breeze.
It smokes aloft?Unwavering:?It hunches soft?Under storm's wing.
It has no care?For gleam or gloom:?It stays there?While I shall roam,
Die, and forget?The hill of trees,?The gleam, the wet,?This roaring peace.
LIKE THE TOUCH OF RAIN
LIKE the touch of rain she was?On a man's flesh and hair and eyes?When the joy of walking thus?Has taken him by surprise:
With the love of the storm he burns,?He sings, he laughs, well I know how,?But forgets when he returns?As I shall not forget her "Go now."
Those two words shut a door?Between me and the blessed rain?That was never shut before?And will not open again.
THE PATH
RUNNING along a bank, a parapet?That saves from the precipitous wood below?The level road, there is a path. It serves?Children for looking down the long smooth steep,?Between the legs of beech and yew, to where?A fallen tree checks the sight: while men and women?Content themselves with the road and what they see?Over the bank, and what the children tell.?The path, winding like silver, trickles on,?Bordered and even invaded by thinnest moss?That tries to cover roots and crumbling chalk?With gold, olive, and emerald, but in vain.?The children wear it. They have flattened the bank?On top, and silvered it between the moss?With the current of their feet, year after year.?But the road is houseless, and leads not to school.?To see a child is rare there, and the eye?Has but the road, the wood that overhangs?And underyawns it, and the path that looks?As if it led on to some legendary?Or fancied place where men have wished to go?And stay; till, sudden, it ends where the wood ends.
THE COMBE
THE Combe was ever dark, ancient and dark.?Its mouth is stopped with bramble, thorn, and briar;?And no one scrambles over the sliding chalk?By beech and yew and perishing juniper?Down the half precipices of its sides, with roots?And rabbit holes for steps. The sun of Winter,?The moon of Summer, and all the singing birds?Except the missel-thrush that loves juniper,?Are quite shut out. But far more ancient and dark?The Combe looks since they killed the badger there,?Dug him out and gave him to the hounds,?That most ancient Briton of English beasts.
IF I SHOULD EVER BY CHANCE
IF I should ever by chance grow rich?I'll buy Codham, Cockridden, and Childerditch,?Roses, Pyrgo, and Lapwater,?And let them all to my elder daughter.?The rent I shall ask of her will be only?Each year's first violets, white and lonely,?The first primroses and orchises--?She must find them before I do, that is.?But if she finds a blossom on furze?Without rent they shall all for ever be hers,?Codham, Cockridden, and Childerditch,?Roses, Pyrgo and Lapwater,--?I shall give them all to my elder daughter.
WHAT SHALL I GIVE?
WHAT shall I give my daughter the younger?More than will keep her from cold and hunger??I shall not give her anything.?If she shared South Weald and Havering,?Their acres, the two brooks running between,?Paine's Brook and Weald Brook,?With pewit, woodpecker, swan, and rook,?She would be no richer than the queen?Who once on a time sat in Havering Bower?Alone, with the shadows, pleasure and power.?She could do no more with Samarcand,?Or the mountains of a mountain land?And its far white house above cottages?Like Venus above the Pleiades.?Her small hands I would not cumber?With so many acres and their lumber,?But leave her Steep and her own world?And her spectacled self with hair uncurled,?Wanting a thousand little things?That time without contentment brings.
IF I WERE TO OWN
IF I were to own this countryside?As far as a man in a day could ride,?And the Tyes were mine for giving or letting,--?Wingle Tye and Margaretting?Tye,--and Skreens, Gooshays, and Cockerells,?Shellow, Rochetts, Bandish, and Pickerells,?Marlins, Lambkins, and Lillyputs,?Their copses, ponds, roads, and ruts,?Fields where plough-horses steam and plovers?Fling and whimper, hedges that lovers?Love, and orchards, shrubberies, walls?Where the sun untroubled by north wind falls,?And single trees where the thrush sings well?His proverbs untranslatable,?I would give them all to my son?If he would let me any one?For a song, a blackbird's song, at dawn.?He should have no more, till on my lawn?Never a one was left, because I?Had shot them to put them into a pie,--?His Essex blackbirds, every one,?And I was left old and alone.
Then unless I could pay, for rent, a song?As sweet as a blackbird's, and as long--?No more--he should have the house, not I:?Margaretting or Wingle Tye,?Or it might be Skreens, Gooshays, or Cockerells,?Shellow, Rochetts, Bandish, or Pickerells,?Martins, Lambkins, or Lillyputs,?Should be his till the cart tracks had no ruts.
AND YOU, HELEN
AND you, Helen, what should I give you??So many things I would give you?Had I an infinite great store?Offered me and I stood before?To choose. I would give you youth,?All kinds of loveliness and truth,?A clear eye as good as mine,?Lands, waters, flowers, wine,?As many children as your heart?Might wish for, a far better art?Than mine can be, all you have lost?Upon the travelling waters tossed,?Or given to me. If I could choose?Freely in that great treasure-house?Anything from any shelf,?I would give you back yourself,?And power to discriminate?What you want and want it not too late,?Many fair days free from care?And heart to enjoy both foul and fair,?And myself, too, if I could find?Where it lay hidden and it proved kind.
WHEN FIRST
WHEN first I came here I had hope,?Hope for I knew not what. Fast beat?My heart at sight of the tall slope?Or grass and yews, as if my feet
Only by scaling its steps of chalk?Would see something no other hill?Ever disclosed. And now I walk?Down it the last time. Never will
My heart beat so again at sight?Of any hill although as fair?And loftier. For infinite?The change, late unperceived, this year,
The twelfth, suddenly, shows me plain.?Hope now,--not health, nor cheerfulness,?Since they can come and go again,?As often one brief hour witnesses,--
Just hope has gone for ever. Perhaps?I may love other hills yet more?Than this: the future and the maps?Hide something I was waiting for.
One thing I know, that love with chance?And use and time and necessity?Will grow, and louder the heart's dance?At parting than at meeting be.
HEAD AND BOTTLE
THE downs will lose the sun, white alyssum?Lose the bees' hum;?But head and bottle tilted back in the cart?Will never part?Till I am cold as midnight and all my hours?Are beeless flowers.?He neither sees, nor hears, nor smells, nor thinks,?But only drinks,?Quiet in the yard where tree trunks do not lie?More quietly.
AFTER YOU SPEAK
AFTER you speak?And what you meant?Is plain,?My eyes?Meet yours that mean--?With your cheeks and hair--?Something more wise,?More dark,?And far different.?Even so the lark?Loves dust?And nestles in it?The minute?Before he must?Soar in lone flight?So far,?Like a black star?He seems--?A mote?Of singing dust?Afloat?Above,?That dreams?And sheds no light.?I know your lust?Is love.
SOWING
IT was a perfect day?For sowing; just?As sweet and dry was the ground?As tobacco-dust.
I tasted deep the hour?Between the far?Owl's chuckling first soft cry?And the first star.
A long stretched hour it was;?Nothing undone?Remained; the early seeds?All safely sown.
And now, hark at the rain,?Windless and light,?Half a kiss, half a tear,?Saying good-night.
WHEN WE TWO WALKED
WHEN we two walked in Lent?We imagined that happiness?Was something different?And this was something less.
But happy were we to hide?Our happiness, not as they were?Who acted in their pride?Juno and Jupiter:
For the Gods in their jealousy?Murdered that wife and man,?And we that were wise live free?To recall our happiness then.
IN MEMORIAM (Easter, 1915)
THE flowers left thick at nightfall in the wood?This Eastertide call into mind the men,?Now far from home, who, with their sweethearts, should?Have gathered them and will do never again.
FIFTY FAGGOTS
THERE they stand, on their ends, the fifty faggots?That once were underwood of hazel and ash?In Jenny Pinks's Copse. Now, by the hedge?Close packed, they make a thicket fancy alone?Can creep through with the mouse and wren. Next
Spring?A blackbird or a robin will nest there,?Accustomed to them, thinking they will remain?Whatever is for ever to a bird:?This Spring it is too late; the swift has come.?'Twas a hot day for carrying them up:?Better they will never warm me, though they must?Light several Winters' fires. Before they are done?The war will have ended, many other things?Have ended, maybe, that I can no more?Foresee or more control than robin and wren.
WOMEN HE LIKED
WOMEN he liked, did shovel-bearded Bob,?Old Farmer Hayward of the Heath, but he?Loved horses. He himself was like a cob,?And leather-coloured. Also he loved a tree.
For the life in them he loved most living things,?But a tree chiefly. All along the lane?He planted elms where now the stormcock sings?That travellers hear from the slow-climbing train.
Till then the track had never had a name?For all its thicket and the nightingales?That should have earned it. No one was to blame.?To name a thing beloved man sometimes fails.
Many years since, Bob Hayward died, and now?None passes there because the mist and the rain?Out of the elms have turned the lane to slough?And gloom, the name alone survives, Bob's Lane.
EARLY ONE MORNING
EARLY one morning in May I set out,?And nobody I knew was about.
I'm bound away for ever,?Away somewhere, away for ever.
There was no wind to trouble the weathercocks.?I had burnt my letters and darned my socks.
No one knew I was going away,?I thought myself I should come back some day.
I heard the brook through the town gardens run.?O sweet was the mud turned to dust by the sun.
A gate banged in a fence and banged in my head.?"A fine morning, sir." a shepherd said.
I could not return from my liberty,?To my youth and my love and my misery.
The past is the only dead thing that smells sweet,?The only sweet thing that is not also fleet.
I'm bound away for ever,?Away somewhere, away for ever.
THE CHERRY TREES
THE cherry trees bend over and are shedding?On the old road where all that passed are dead,?Their petals, strewing the grass as for a wedding?This early May morn when there is none to wed.
IT RAINS
IT rains, and nothing stirs within the fence?Anywhere through the orchard's untrodden, dense?Forest of parsley. The great diamonds?Of rain on the grassblades there is none to break,?Or the fallen petals further down to shake.
And I am nearly as happy as possible?To search the wilderness in vain though well,?To think of two walking, kissing there,?Drenched, yet forgetting the kisses of the rain:?Sad, too, to think that never, never again,
Unless alone, so happy shall I walk?In the rain. When I turn away, on its fine stalk?Twilight has fined to naught, the parsley flower?Figures, suspended still and ghostly white,?The past hovering as it revisits the light.
THE HUXTER
HE has a hump like an ape on his back;?He has of money a plentiful lack;?And but for a gay coat of double his girth?There is not a plainer thing on the earth
This fine May morning.
But the huxter has a bottle of beer;?He drives a cart and his wife sits near?Who does not heed his lack or his hump;?And they laugh as down the lane they bump
This fine May morning.
A GENTLEMAN
"HE has robbed two clubs. The judge at Salisbury?Can't give him more than he undoubtedly?Deserves. The scoundrel! Look at his photograph!?A lady-killer! Hanging's too good by half?For such as he." So said the stranger, one?With crimes yet undiscovered or undone.?But at the inn the Gipsy dame began:?"Now he was what I call a gentleman.?He went along with Carrie, and when she?Had a baby he paid up so readily?His half a crown. Just like him. A crown'd have
been?More like him. For I never knew him mean.?Oh! but he was such a nice gentleman. Oh!?Last time we met he said if me and Joe?Was anywhere near we must be sure and call.?He put his arms around our Amos all?As if he were his own son. I pray God?Save him from justice! Nicer man never trod."
THE BRIDGE
I HAVE come a long way to-day:?On a strange bridge alone,?Remembering friends, old friends,?I rest, without smile or moan,?As they remember me without smile or moan.
All are behind, the kind?And the unkind too, no more?To-night than a dream. The stream?Runs softly yet drowns the Past,?The dark-lit stream has drowned the Future and the
Past.
No traveller has rest more blest?Than this moment brief between?Two lives, when the Night's first lights?And shades hide what has never been,?Things goodlier, lovelier, dearer, than will be or have
been.
LOB
AT hawthorn-time in Wiltshire travelling?In search of something chance would never bring,?An old man's face, by life and weather cut?And coloured,--rough, brown, sweet as any nut,--?A land face, sea-blue-eyed,--hung in my mind?When I had left him many a mile behind.?All he said was: "Nobody can't stop 'ee. It's?A footpath, right enough. You see those bits?Of mounds--that's where they opened up the barrows?Sixty years since, while I was scaring sparrows.?They thought as there was something to find there,?But couldn't find it, by digging, anywhere."
To turn back then and seek him, where was the use??There were three Manningfords,--Abbots, Bohun, and
Bruce:?And whether Alton, not Manningford, it was,?My memory could not decide, because?There was both Alton Barnes and Alton Priors.?All had their churches, graveyards, farms, and byres,?Lurking to one side up the paths and lanes,?Seldom well seen except by aeroplanes;?And when bells rang, or pigs squealed, or cocks crowed,?Then only heard. Ages ago the road?Approached. The people stood and looked and turned,?Nor asked it to come nearer, nor yet learned?To move out there and dwell in all men's dust.?And yet withal they shot the weathercock, just?Because 'twas he crowed out of tune, they said:?So now the copper weathercock is dead.?If they had reaped their dandelions and sold?Them fairly, they could have afforded gold.
Many years passed, and I went back again?Among those villages, and looked for men?Who might have known my ancient. He himself?Had long been dead or laid upon the shelf,?I thought. One man I asked about him roared?At my description: "'Tis old Bottlesford?He means, Bill." But another said: "Of course,?It was Jack Button up at the White Horse.?He's dead, sir, these three years." This lasted till?A girl proposed Walker of Walker's Hill,?"Old Adam Walker. Adam's Point you'll see?Marked on the maps."
"That was her roguery,"?The next man said. He was a squire's son?Who loved wild bird and beast, and dog and gun?For killing them. He had loved them from his birth,?One with another, as he loved the earth.?"The man may be like Button, or Walker, or?Like Bottlesford, that you want, but far more?He sounds like one I saw when I was a child.?I could almost swear to him. The man was wild?And wandered. His home was where he was free.?Everybody has met one such man as he.?Does he keep clear old paths that no one uses?But once a life-time when he loves or muses??He is English as this gate, these flowers, this mire.?And when at eight years old Lob-lie-by-the-fire?Came in my books, this was the man I saw.?He has been in England as long as dove and daw,?Calling the wild cherry tree the merry tree,?The rose campion Bridget-in-her-bravery;?And in a tender mood he, as I guess,?Christened one flower Love-in-idleness,?And while he walked from Exeter to Leeds?One April called all cuckoo-flowers Milkmaids.?From him old herbal Gerard learnt, as a boy,?To name wild clematis the Traveller's-joy.?Our blackbirds sang no English till his ear?Told him they called his Jan Toy 'Pretty dear.'?(She was Jan Toy the Lucky, who, having lost?A shilling, and found a penny loaf, rejoiced.)?For reasons of his own to him the wren?Is Jenny Pooter. Before all other men?'Twas he first called the Hog's Back the Hog's Back.?That Mother Dunch's Buttocks should not lack?Their name was his care. He too could explain?Totteridge and Totterdown and Juggler's Lane:?He knows, if anyone. Why Tumbling Bay,?Inland in Kent, is called so, he might say.
"But little he says compared with what he does.?If ever a sage troubles him he will buzz?Like a beehive to conclude the tedious fray:?And the sage, who knows all languages, runs away.?Yet Lob has thirteen hundred names for a fool,?And though he never could spare time for school?To unteach what the fox so well expressed,?On biting the cock's head off,--Quietness is best,--?He can talk quite as well as anyone?After his thinking is forgot and done.?He first of all told someone else's wife,?For a farthing she'd skin a flint and spoil a knife?Worth sixpence skinning it. She heard him speak:?'She had a face as long as a wet week'?Said he, telling the tale in after years.?With blue smock and with gold rings in his ears,?Sometimes he is a pedlar, not too poor?To keep his wit. This is tall Tom that bore?The logs in, and with Shakespeare in the hall?Once talked, when icicles hung by the wall.?As Herne the Hunter he has known hard times.?On sleepless nights he made up weather rhymes?Which others spoilt. And, Hob being then his name,?He kept the hog that thought the butcher came?To bring his breakfast 'You thought wrong,' said Hob.?When there were kings in Kent this very Lob,?Whose sheep grew fat and he himself grew merry,?Wedded the king's daughter of Canterbury;?For he alone, unlike squire, lord, and king,?Watched a night by her without slumbering;?He kept both waking. When he was but a lad?He won a rich man's heiress, deaf, dumb, and sad,?By rousing her to laugh at him. He carried?His donkey on his back. So they were married.?And while he was a little cobbler's boy?He tricked the giant coming to destroy?Shrewsbury by flood. 'And how far is it yet?'?The giant asked in passing. 'I forget;?But see these shoes I've worn out on the road?And we're not there yet.' He emptied out his load?Of shoes for mending. The giant let fall from his spade?The earth for damming Severn, and thus made?The Wrekin hill; and little Ercall hill?Rose where the giant scraped his boots. While still?So young, our Jack was chief of Gotham's sages.?But long before he could have been wise, ages?Earlier than this, while he grew thick and strong?And ate his bacon, or, at times, sang a song?And merely smelt it, as Jack the giant-killer?He made a name. He too ground up the miller,?The Yorkshireman who ground men's bones for flour.
"Do you believe Jack dead before his hour??Or that his name is Walker, or Bottlesford,?Or Button, a mere clown, or squire, or lord??The man you saw,--Lob-lie-by-the-fire, Jack Cade,?Jack Smith, Jack Moon, poor Jack of every trade,?Young Jack, or old Jack, or Jack What-d'ye-call,?Jack-in-the-hedge, or Robin-run-by-the-wall,?Robin Hood, Ragged Robin, lazy Bob,?One of the lords of No Man's Land, good Lob,--?Although he was seen dying at Waterloo,?Hastings, Agincourt, and Sedgemoor too,--?Lives yet. He never will admit he is dead?Till millers cease to grind men's bones for bread,?Not till our weathercock crows once again?And I remove my house out of the lane?On to the road." With this he disappeared?In hazel and thorn tangled with old-man's-beard.?But one glimpse of his back, as there he stood,?Choosing his way, proved him of old Jack's blood?Young Jack perhaps, and now a Wiltshireman?As he has oft been since his days began.
BRIGHT CLOUDS
BRIGHT clouds of may?Shade half the pond.?Beyond,?All but one bay?Of emerald?Tall reeds?Like criss-cross bayonets?Where a bird once called,?Lies bright as the sun.?No one heeds.?The light wind frets?And drifts the scum?Of may-blossom.?Till the moorhen calls?Again?Naught's to be done?By birds or men.?Still the may falls.
THE CLOUDS THAT ARE SO LIGHT
THE clouds that are so light,?Beautiful, swift and bright,?Cast shadows on field and park?Of the earth that is so dark,
And even so now, light one!?Beautiful, swift and bright one!?You let fall on a heart that was dark,?Unillumined, a deeper mark.
But clouds would have, without earth?To shadow, far less worth:?Away from your shadow on me?Your beauty less would be,
And if it still be treasured?An age hence, it shall be measured?By this small dark spot?Without which it were not.
SOME EYES CONDEMN
SOME eyes condemn the earth they gaze upon:?Some wait patiently till they know far more?Than earth can tell them: some laugh at the whole?As folly of another's making: one?I knew that laughed because he saw, from core?To rind, not one thing worth the laugh his soul?Had ready at waking: some eyes have begun?With laughing; some stand startled at the door.
Others, too, I have seen rest, question, roll,?Dance, shoot. And many I have loved watching?Some?I could not take my eyes from till they turned?And loving died. I had not found my goal.?But thinking of your eyes, dear, I become?Dumb: for they flamed, and it was me they burned.
MAY 23
THERE never was a finer day,?And never will be while May is May,--?The third, and not the last of its kind;?But though fair and clear the two behind?Seemed pursued by tempests overpast;?And the morrow with fear that it could not last?Was spoiled. To-day ere the stones were warm?Five minutes of thunderstorm?Dashed it with rain, as if to secure,?By one tear, its beauty the luck to endure.
At mid-day then along the lane?Old Jack Noman appeared again,?Jaunty and old, crooked and tall,?And stopped and grinned at me over the wall,?With a cowslip bunch in his button-hole?And one in his cap. Who could say if his roll?Came from flints in the road, the weather, or ale??He was welcome as the nightingale.?Not an hour of the sun had been wasted on Jack?"I've got my Indian complexion back"?Said he. He was tanned like a harvester,?Like his short clay pipe, like the leaf and bur?That clung to his coat from last night's bed,?Like the ploughland crumbling red.?Fairer flowers were none on the earth?Than his cowslips wet with the dew of their birth,?Or fresher leaves than the cress in his basket.?"Where did they come from, Jack?" "Don't ask it,?And you'll be told no lies." "Very well:?Then I can't buy." "I don't want to sell.?Take them and these flowers, too, free.?Perhaps you have something to give me??Wait till next time. The better the day . . .?The Lord couldn't make a better, I say;?If he could, he never has done."?So off went Jack with his roll-walk-run,?Leaving his cresses from Oakshott rill?And his cowslips from Wheatham hill.
'Twas the first day that the midges bit;?But though they bit me, I was glad of it:?Of the dust in my face, too, I was glad.?Spring could do nothing to make me sad.?Bluebells hid all the ruts in the copse.?The elm seeds lay in the road like hops,?That fine day, May the twenty-third,?The day Jack Noman disappeared.
THE GLORY
THE glory of the beauty of the morning,--?The cuckoo crying over the untouched dew;?The blackbird that has found it, and the dove?That tempts me on to something sweeter than love;?White clouds ranged even and fair as new-mown hay;?The heat, the stir, the sublime vacancy?Of sky and meadow and forest and my own heart:--?The glory invites me, yet it leaves me scorning?All I can ever do, all I can be,?Beside the lovely of motion, shape, and hue,?The happiness I fancy fit to dwell?In beauty's presence. Shall I now this day?Begin to seek as far as heaven, as hell,?Wisdom or strength to match this beauty, start?And tread the pale dust pitted with small dark drops,?In hope to find whatever it is I seek,?Hearkening to short-lived happy-seeming things?That we know naught of, in the hazel copse??Or must I be content with discontent?As larks and swallows are perhaps with wings??And shall I ask at the day's end once more?What beauty is, and what I can have meant?By happiness? And shall I let all go,?Glad, weary, or both? Or shall I perhaps know?That I was happy oft and oft before,?Awhile forgetting how I am fast pent,?How dreary-swift, with naught to travel to,?Is Time? I cannot bite the day to the core.
MELANCHOLY
THE rain and wind, the rain and wind, raved endlessly.?On me the Summer storm, and fever, and melancholy?Wrought magic, so that if I feared the solitude?Far more I feared all company: too sharp, too rude,?Had been the wisest or the dearest human voice.?What I desired I knew not, but whate'er my choice?Vain it must be, I knew. Yet naught did my despair?But sweeten the strange sweetness, while through the
wild air?All day long I heard a distant cuckoo calling?And, soft as dulcimers, sounds of near water falling,?And, softer, and remote as if in history,?Rumours of what had touched my friends, my foes,
or me.
ADLESTROP
YES. I remember Adlestrop--?The name, because one afternoon?Of heat the express-train drew up there?Unwontedly. It was late June.
The steam hissed. Someone cleared his throat.?No one left and no one came?On the bare platform. What I saw?Was Adlestrop--only the name
And willows, willow-herb, and grass,?And meadowsweet, and haycocks dry,?No whit less still and lonely fair?Than the high cloudlets in the sky.
And for that minute a blackbird sang?Close by, and round him, mistier,?Farther and farther, all the birds?Of Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire.
THE GREEN ROADS
THE green roads that end in the forest?Are strewn with white goose feathers this June,
Like marks left behind by some one gone to the forest?To show his track. But he has never come back.
Down each green road a cottage looks at the forest.?Round one the nettle towers; two are bathed in flowers.
An old man along the green road to the forest?Strays from one, from another a child alone.
In the thicket bordering the forest,?All day long a thrush twiddles his song.
It is old, but the trees are young in the forest,?All but one like a castle keep, in the middle deep.
That oak saw the ages pass in the forest:?They were a host, but their memories are lost,
For the tree is dead: all things forget the forest?Excepting perhaps me, when now I see
The old man, the child, the goose feathers at the edge
of the forest,?And hear all day long the thrush repeat his song.
THE MILL-POND
THE sun blazed while the thunder yet?Added a boom:?A wagtail flickered bright over?The mill-pond's gloom:
Less than the cooing in the alder?Isles of the pool?Sounded the thunder through that plunge?Of waters cool.
Scared starlings on the aspen tip?Past the black mill?Outchattered the stream and the next roar?Far on the hill.
As my feet dangling teased the foam?That slid below?A girl came out. "Take care!" she said--?Ages ago.
She startled me, standing quite close?Dressed all in white:?Ages ago I was angry till?She passed from sight.
Then the storm burst, and as I crouched?To shelter, how?Beautiful and kind, too, she seemed,?As she does now!
IT WAS UPON
IT was upon a July evening.?At a stile I stood, looking along a path?Over the country by a second Spring?Drenched perfect green again. "The lattermath?Will be a fine one." So the stranger said,?A wandering man. Albeit I stood at rest,?Flushed with desire I was. The earth outspread,?Like meadows of the future, I possessed.
And as an unaccomplished prophecy?The stranger's words, after the interval?Of a score years, when those fields are by me?Never to be recrossed, now I recall,?This July eve, and question, wondering,?What of the lattermath to this hoar Spring?
TALL NETTLES
TALL nettles cover up, as they have done?These many springs, the rusty harrow, the plough?Long worn out, and the roller made of stone:?Only the elm butt tops the nettles now.
This corner of the farmyard I like most:?As well as any bloom upon a flower?I like the dust on the nettles, never lost?Except to prove the sweetness of a shower.
HAYMAKING
AFTER night's thunder far away had rolled?The fiery day had a kernel sweet of cold,?And in the perfect blue the clouds uncurled,?Like the first gods before they made the world?And misery, swimming the stormless sea?In beauty and in divine gaiety.?The smooth white empty road was lightly strewn?With leaves--the holly's Autumn falls in June--?And fir cones standing stiff up in the heat.?The mill-foot water tumbled white and lit?With tossing crystals, happier than any crowd?Of children pouring out of school aloud.?And in the little thickets where a sleeper?For ever might lie lost, the nettle-creeper?And garden warbler sang unceasingly;?While over them shrill shrieked in his fierce glee?The swift with wings and tail as sharp and narrow?As if the bow had flown off with the arrow.?Only the scent of woodbine and hay new-mown?Travelled the road. In the field sloping down,?Park-like, to where its willows showed the brook,?Haymakers rested. The tosser lay forsook?Out in the sun; and the long waggon stood?Without its team, it seemed it never would?Move from the shadow of that single yew.?The team, as still, until their task was due,?Beside the labourers enjoyed the shade?That three squat oaks mid-field together made?Upon a circle of grass and weed uncut,?And on the hollow, once a chalk-pit, but?Now brimmed with nut and elder-flower so clean.?The men leaned on their rakes, about to begin,?But still. And all were silent. All was old,?This morning time, with a great age untold,?Older than Clare and Cobbett, Morland and Crome,?Than, at the field's far edge, the farmer's home,?A white house crouched at the foot of a great tree.?Under the heavens that know not what years be?The men, the beasts, the trees, the implements?Uttered even what they will in times far hence--?All of us gone out of the reach of change--?Immortal in a picture of an old grange.
HOW AT ONCE
How at once should I know,?When stretched in the harvest blue?I saw the swift's black bow,?That I would not have that view?Another day?Until next May?Again it is due?
The same year after year--?But with the swift alone.?With other things I but fear?That they will be over and done?Suddenly?And I only see?Them to know them gone.
GONE, GONE AGAIN
GONE, gone again,?May, June, July,?And August gone,?Again gone by,
Not memorable?Save that I saw them go,?As past the empty quays?The rivers flow.
And now again,?In the harvest rain,?The Blenheim oranges?Fall grubby from the trees,
As when I was young--?And when the lost one was here--?And when the war began?To turn young men to dung.
Look at the old house,?Outmoded, dignified,?Dark and untenanted,?With grass growing instead
Of the footsteps of life,?The friendliness, the strife;?In its beds have lain?Youth, love, age and pain:
I am something like that;?Only I am not dead,?Still breathing and interested?In the house that is not dark:--
I am something like that:?Not one pane to reflect the sun,?For the schoolboys to throw at--?They have broken every one.
THE SUN USED TO SHINE
THE sun used to shine while we two walked?Slowly together, paused and started?Again, and sometimes mused, sometimes talked?As either pleased, and cheerfully parted
Each night. We never disagreed?Which gate to rest on. The to be?And the late past we gave small heed.?We turned from men or poetry
To rumours of the war remote?Only till both stood disinclined?For aught but the yellow flavorous coat?Of an apple wasps had undermined;
Or a sentry of dark betonies,?The stateliest of small flowers on earth,?At the forest verge; or crocuses?Pale purple as if they had their birth
In sunless Hades fields. The war?Came back to mind with the moonrise?Which soldiers in the east afar?Beheld then. Nevertheless, our eyes
Could as well imagine the Crusades?Or Caesar's battles. Everything?To faintness like those rumours fades--?Like the brook's water glittering
Under the moonlight--like those walks?Now--like us two that took them, and?The fallen apples, all the talks?And silences--like memory's sand
When the tide covers it late or soon,?And other men through other flowers?In those fields under the same moon?Go talking and have easy hours.
OCTOBER
THE green elm with the one great bough of gold?Lets leaves into the grass slip, one by one,--?The short hill grass, the mushrooms small milk-white,?Harebell and scabious and tormentil,?That blackberry and gorse, in dew and sun,?Bow down to; and the wind travels too light?To shake the fallen birch leaves from the fern;?The gossamers wander at their own will.?At heavier steps than birds' the squirrels scold.
The rich scene has grown fresh again and new?As Spring and to the touch is not more cool?Than it is warm to the gaze; and now I might?As happy be as earth is beautiful,?Were I some other or with earth could turn?In alternation of violet and rose,?Harebell and snowdrop, at their season due,?And gorse that has no time not to be gay.?But if this be not happiness,--who knows??Some day I shall think this a happy day,?And this mood by the name of melancholy?Shall no more blackened and obscured be.
THE LONG SMALL ROOM
THE long small room that showed willows in the west?Narrowed up to the end the fireplace filled,?Although not wide. I liked it. No one guessed?What need or accident made them so build.
Only the moon, the mouse and the sparrow peeped?In from the ivy round the casement thick.?Of all they saw and heard there they shall keep?The tale for the old ivy and older brick.
When I look back I am like moon, sparrow and mouse?That witnessed what they could never understand?Or alter or prevent in the dark house.?One thing remains the same--this my right hand
Crawling crab-like over the clean white page,?Resting awhile each morning on the pillow,?Then once more starting to crawl on towards age.?The hundred last leaves stream upon the willow.
LIBERTY
THE last light has gone out of the world, except?This moonlight lying on the grass like frost?Beyond the brink of the tall elm's shadow?It is as if everything else had slept?Many an age, unforgotten and lost?The men that were, the things done, long ago,?All I have thought; and but the moon and I?Live yet and here stand idle over the grave?Where all is buried. Both have liberty?To dream what we could do if we were free?To do some thing we had desired long,?The moon and I. There's none less free than who?Does nothing and has nothing else to do,?Being free only for what is not to his mind,?And nothing is to his mind. If every hour?Like this one passing that I have spent among?The wiser others when I have forgot?To wonder whether I was free or not,?Were piled before me, and not lost behind,?And I could take and carry them away?I should be rich; or if I had the power?To wipe out every one and not again?Regret, I should be rich to be so poor.?And yet I still am half in love with pain,?With what is imperfect, with both tears and mirth,?With things that have an end, with life and earth,?And this moon that leaves me dark within the door.
NOVEMBER
NOVEMBER'S days are thirty:?November's earth is dirty,?Those thirty days, from first to last;?And the prettiest things on ground are the paths?With morning and evening hobnails dinted,?With foot and wing-tip overprinted?Or separately charactered,?Of little beast and little bird.?The fields are mashed by sheep, the roads?Make the worst going, the best the woods?Where dead leaves upward and downward scatter.?Few care for the mixture of earth and water,?Twig, leaf, flint, thorn,?Straw, feather, all that men scorn,?Pounded up and sodden by flood,?Condemned as mud.
But of all the months when earth is greener?Not one has clean skies that are cleaner.?Clean and clear and sweet and cold,?They shine above the earth so old,?While the after-tempest cloud?Sails over in silence though winds are loud,?Till the full moon in the east?Looks at the planet in the west?And earth is silent as it is black,?Yet not unhappy for its lack.?Up from the dirty earth men stare:?One imagines a refuge there?Above the mud, in the pure bright?Of the cloudless heavenly light:?Another loves earth and November more dearly?Because without them, he sees clearly,?The sky would be nothing more to his eye?Than he, in any case, is to the sky;?He loves even the mud whose dyes?Renounce all brightness to the skies.
THE SHEILING
IT stands alone?Up in a land of stone?All worn like ancient stairs,?A land of rocks and trees?Nourished on wind and stone.
And all within?Long delicate has been;?By arts and kindliness?Coloured, sweetened, and warmed?For many years has been.
Safe resting there?Men hear in the travelling air?But music, pictures see?In the same daily land?Painted by the wild air.
One maker's mind?Made both, and the house is kind?To the land that gave it peace,?And the stone has taken the house?To its cold heart and is kind.
THE GALLOWS
THERE was a weasel lived in the sun?With all his family,?Till a keeper shot him with his gun?And hung him up on a tree,?Where he swings in the wind and rain,?In the sun and in the snow,?Without pleasure, without pain,?On the dead oak tree bough.
There was a crow who was no sleeper,?But a thief and a murderer?Till a very late hour; and this keeper?Made him one of the things that were,?To hang and flap in rain and wind,?In the sun and in the snow.?There are no more sins to be sinned?On the dead oak tree bough.
There was a magpie, too,?Had a long tongue and a long tail;?He could both talk and do--?But what did that avail??He, too, flaps in the wind and rain?Alongside weasel and crow,?Without pleasure, without pain,?On the dead oak tree bough.
And many other beasts?And birds, skin, bone and feather,?Have been taken from their feasts?And hung up there together,?To swing and have endless leisure?In the sun and in the snow,?Without pain, without pleasure,?On the dead oak tree bough.
BIRDS' NESTS
THE summer nests uncovered by autumn wind.?Some torn, others dislodged, all dark.?Everyone sees them: low or high in tree,?Or hedge, or single bush, they hang like a mark.
Since there's no need of eyes to see them with?I cannot help a little shame?That I missed most, even at eye's level, till?The leaves blew off and made the seeing no game.
'Tis a light pang. I like to see the nests?Still in their places, now first known,?At home and by far roads. Boys knew them not,?Whatever jays and squirrels may have done.
And most I like the winter nests deep-hid?That leaves and berries fell into;?Once a dormouse dined there on hazel-nuts,?And grass and goose-grass seeds found soil and grew.
RAIN
RAIN, midnight rain, nothing but the wild rain?On this bleak hut, and solitude, and me?Remembering again that I shall die?And neither hear the rain nor give it thanks?For washing me cleaner than I have been?Since I was born into this solitude.?Blessed are the dead that the rain rains upon:?But here I pray that none whom once I loved?Is dying to-night or lying still awake?Solitary, listening to the rain,?Either in pain or thus in sympathy?Helpless among the living and the dead,?Like a cold water among broken reeds,?Myriads of broken reeds all still and stiff,?Like me who have no love which this wild rain?Has not dissolved except the love of death,?If love it be towards what is perfect and?Cannot, the tempest tells me, disappoint.
"HOME"
FAIR was the morning, fair our tempers, and?We had seen nothing fairer than that land,?Though strange, and the untrodden snow that made?Wild of the tame, casting out all that was?Not wild and rustic and old; and we were glad.
Fair, too, was afternoon, and first to pass?Were we that league of snow, next the north wind
There was nothing to return for, except need,?And yet we sang nor ever stopped for speed,?As we did often with the start behind.?Faster still strode we when we came in sight?Of the cold roofs where we must spend the night.?Happy we had not been there, nor could be.?Though we had tasted sleep and food and fellowship?Together long.
"How quick" to someone's lip?The words came, "will the beaten horse run home."
The word "home" raised a smile in us all three,?And one repeated it, smiling just so?That all knew what he meant and none would say.?Between three counties far apart that lay?We were divided and looked strangely each?At the other, and we knew we were not friends?But fellows in a union that ends?With the necessity for it, as it ought.
Never a word was spoken, not a thought?Was thought, of what the look meant with the word?"Home" as we walked and watched the sunset blurred.?And then to me the word, only the word,?"Homesick," as it were playfully occurred:?No more.
If I should ever more admit?Than the mere word I could not endure it?For a day longer: this captivity?Must somehow come to an end, else I should be?Another man, as often now I seem,?Or this life be only an evil dream.
THERE'S NOTHING LIKE THE SUN
THERE'S nothing like the sun as the year dies,?Kind as it can be, this world being made so,?To stones and men and beasts and birds and flies,?To all things that it touches except snow,?Whether on mountain side or street of town.?The south wall warms me: November has begun,?Yet never shone the sun as fair as now?While the sweet last-left damsons from the bough?With spangles of the morning's storm drop down?Because the starling shakes it, whistling what?Once swallows sang. But I have not forgot?That there is nothing, too, like March's sun,?Like April's, or July's, or June's, or May's,?Or January's, or February's, great days:?And August, September, October, and December?Have equal days, all different from November.?No day of any month but I have said--?Or, if I could live long enough, should say--?"There's nothing like the sun that shines to-day"?There's nothing like the sun till we are dead.
WHEN HE SHOULD LAUGH
WHEN he should laugh the wise man knows full well:?For he knows what is truly laughable.?But wiser is the man who laughs also,?Or holds his laughter, when the foolish do.
AN OLD SONG
THE sun set, the wind fell, the sea?Was like a mirror shaking:?The one small wave that clapped the land?A mile-long snake of foam was making?Where tide had smoothed and wind had dried?The vacant sand.
A light divided the swollen clouds?And lay most perfectly?Like a straight narrow footbridge bright?That crossed over the sea to me;?And no one else in the whole world?Saw that same sight.
I walked elate, my bridge always?Just one step from my feet:?A robin sang, a shade in shade:?And all I did was to repeat:?"I'll go no more a-roving?With you, fair maid."
The sailors' song of merry loving?With dusk and sea-gull's mewing?Mixed sweet, the lewdness far outweighed?By the wild charm the chorus played:?"I'll go no more a-roving?With you, fair maid:?A-roving, a-roving, since roving's been my ruin,?I'll go no more a-roving with you, fair maid."
_In Amsterdam there dwelt a maid--?Mark well what I do say--?In Amsterdam there dwelt a maid?And she was a mistress of her trade:?I'll go no more a-roving?With you, fair maid:?A-roving, a-roving, since roving's been my ruin,?I'll go no more a-roving with you, fair maid._
THE PENNY WHISTLE
THE new moon hangs like an ivory bugle?In the naked frosty blue;?And the ghylls of the forest, already blackened?By Winter, are blackened anew.
The brooks that cut up and increase the forest,?As if they had never known?The sun, are roaring with black hollow voices?Betwixt rage and a moan.
But still the caravan-hut by the hollies?Like a kingfisher gleams between:?Round the mossed old hearths of the charcoal-burners?First primroses ask to be seen.
The charcoal-burners are black, but their linen?Blows white on the line;?And white the letter the girl is reading?Under that crescent fine;
And her brother who hides apart in a thicket,?Slowly and surely playing?On a whistle an olden nursery melody,?Says far more than I am saying.
LIGHTS OUT
I HAVE come to the borders of sleep,?The unfathomable deep?Forest where all must lose?Their way, however straight,?Or winding, soon or late;?They cannot choose.
Many a road and track?That, since the dawn's first crack,?Up to the forest brink,?Deceived the travellers?Suddenly now blurs,?And in they sink.
Here love ends,?Despair, ambition ends,?All pleasure and all trouble,?Although most sweet or bitter,?Here ends in sleep that is sweeter?Than tasks most noble.
There is not any book?Or face of dearest look?That I would not turn from now?To go into the unknown?I must enter and leave alone?I know not how.
The tall forest towers;?Its cloudy foliage lowers?Ahead, shelf above shelf;?Its silence I hear and obey?That I may lose my way?And myself.
COCK-CROW
OUT of the wood of thoughts that grows by night?To be cut down by the sharp axe of light,--?Out of the night, two cocks together crow,?Cleaving the darkness with a silver blow:?And bright before my eyes twin trumpeters stand,?Heralds of splendour, one at either hand,?Each facing each as in a coat of arms:?The milkers lace their boots up at the farms.
WORDS
OUT of us all?That make rhymes,?Will you choose?Sometimes--?As the winds use?A crack in a wall?Or a drain,?Their joy or their pain?To whistle through--?Choose me,?You English words?
I know you:?You are light as dreams,?Tough as oak,?Precious as gold,?As poppies and corn,?Or an old cloak:?Sweet as our birds?To the ear,?As the burnet rose?In the heat?Of Midsummer:?Strange as the races?Of dead and unborn:?Strange and sweet?Equally,?And familiar,?To the eye,?As the dearest faces?That a man knows,?And as lost homes are:?But though older far?Than oldest yew,--?As our hills are, old.--?Worn new?Again and again:?Young as our streams?After rain:?And as dear?As the earth which you prove?That we love.
Make me content?With some sweetness?From Wales?Whose nightingales?Have no wings,--?From Wiltshire and Kent?And Herefordshire,?And the villages there,--?From the names, and the things?No less.
Let me sometimes dance?With you,?Or climb?Or stand perchance?In ecstasy,?Fixed and free?In a rhyme,?As poets do.
THE END
PRINTED AT
THE CHAPEL RIVER PRESS
KINGSTON, SURREY.
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems, by Edward Thomas
	?	END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS ***
	?	This file should be named 22423.txt or 22423.zip ***** This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
	?	http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/4/2/22423/
Produced by Lewis Jones
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial?redistribution.
	?	START: FULL LICENSE ***
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE?PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at http://gutenberg.org/license).
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that
	?	You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
	?	the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
	?	You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
	?	you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
	?	You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
	?	money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.
	?	You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
	?	distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm?collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at?http://pglaf.org/fundraising. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at http://pglaf.org
For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby?Chief Executive and Director?gbnewby@pglaf.org
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit http://pglaf.org
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
http://www.gutenberg.org
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
from http://www.umnet.com/  ---umnet.com,mobile your fun!---